[DOC-11397] Document recursive queries using WITH clause (#133)
couchbaselabs/docs-devex: modules/n1ql/pages/n1ql-language-reference/recursive.adoc

= Recursive WITH Clause

> :description: Use the RECURSIVE keyword to enable recursive referencing in WITH clause common table expressions.

Reviewer: I would probably call it the WITH RECURSIVE clause, following the order of keywords in the syntax?

```suggestion
= WITH RECURSIVE Clause
:description: Use the WITH RECURSIVE clause to enable recursive referencing in common table expressions.
```

:imagesdir: ../../assets/images
:page-topic-type: reference

> 

Reviewer: Boilerplate text for new topic in this release:

```suggestion
:page-status: Couchbase Server 7.6

```

[abstract]
{description}

[#purpose]
== Purpose

The common table expressions (CTEs) created by the WITH clause simplify complex queries and create temporary result sets which can be used as data sources or as expressions for queries.

> The SELECT definition for CTEs is split by the UNION/UNION ALL operators.
> 
> * The left arm of UNION/UNION ALL contains an anchor clause, which is non-recursive. 
> The anchor clause produces an initial set of documents as an intermediate result set for the CTE keyspace.
> 
> * The right arm of UNION/UNION ALL contains the recursive clause.
> The recursive clause produces a new set of documents.

Reviewer: Reworking this to introduce the concepts and why we would need to use this.

```suggestion
The WITH RECURSIVE clause is an extension of the WITH clause which enables you to create recursive queries.
You can use recursive queries with hierarchical data, or data in a tree structure.
In these cases, the data may have an arbitrary number of levels, and you won't know in advance how deeply you need to traverse the data.

The CTE for a recursive query includes a UNION or UNION ALL xref:n1ql:n1ql-language-reference/union.adoc[set operator]. 

* The left arm of UNION/UNION ALL contains an anchor clause, which is non-recursive. 
The anchor clause produces an initial set of documents as an intermediate result set for the CTE keyspace.

* The right arm of UNION/UNION ALL contains the recursive clause.
The recursive clause produces a new set of documents.
```

The recursive clause is executed again, with the CTE keyspace now referring to the result produced by the initial recursive clause.
This process repeats until it results in an empty intermediate result set.
The intermediate result sets are appended to produce a final output.

[#syntax]
== Syntax

> [source,ebnf]
> ----
> include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-with-clause]
> ----
> 
> image::n1ql-language-reference/recursive-with-clause.png["Syntax diagram", align=left]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,ebnf]
----
include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=with-recursive-clause]
----

image::n1ql-language-reference/with-recursive-clause.png["Syntax diagram", align=left]
```

----

> include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-with-clause-union]

Reviewer 2: the new non-terminal -> ```recursive-with-clause-select```

Also we are **missing** the syntax diagrams for ```anchor-clause``` and ```recursive-clause```

anchor-clause would be a ```select```  from here: https://docs.couchbase.com/server/current/n1ql/n1ql-language-reference/select-syntax.html 

recursive-clause would be a ```select-term``` also from the above page.

Author: Hi Gaurav, do you mean we should add `recursive-with-clause-union ::= anchor_clause ( 'UNION' | 'UNION ALL' )? recursive_clause` to the "SELECT Syntax" page?

Reviewer 2: Hi,
No, the sorry for the confusion with the syntax diagram
attaching an updated version -> https://drive.google.com/file/d/14_ZlLF2EDZxjZr9dyMWr2P3aAqFi3jX_/view?usp=sharing 

here the anchor clause and recursive clause rules
anchor_clause::= select  // the select can be hyperlinked to the select over here https://docs.couchbase.com/server/current/n1ql/n1ql-language-reference/select-syntax.html 

similarly , for recursive_clause ::= select-term // select-term can be hyperlinked to select-term here https://docs.couchbase.com/server/current/n1ql/n1ql-language-reference/select-syntax.html 

Also mention, select-term in the recursive clause will be marked as recursive only if it refers to the with-alias...

Reviewer: This comment is mostly superseded by my suggested changes to the EBNF. We need to strike a balance between legibility and brevity 😉 

Incidentally, we _will_ have to update the SELECT syntax page, but let's leave that outside the scope of this PR for now.

Author: Sounds good! Thank you both!

> ----
> include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-with-clause-union]
> ----
> 
> image::n1ql-language-reference/recursive-with-clause-union.png["Syntax diagram UNION/UNION ALL", align=left]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[recursive-select]]
=== Recursive SELECT
----
include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-select]
----

image::n1ql-language-reference/recursive-select.png["Syntax diagram", align=left]

The definition for a recursive CTE must be a SELECT statement that includes a UNION or UNION ALL set operator.
If it isn't, the CTE is treated as a non-recursive CTE.

anchor-select::
A xref:n1ql:n1ql-language-reference/select-syntax.adoc[SELECT query] that represents the anchor clause of the CTE.

recursive-select-term::
A xref:n1ql:n1ql-language-reference/select-syntax.adoc#select-term[select term] that represents the recursive clause of the CTE.
```

> [#arguments]
> == Arguments
> 
> The following arguments are optional.
> 
> [source,ebnf]
> ----
> include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-with-clause-options]
> ----
> 
> image::n1ql-language-reference/recursive-with-clause-options.png["Argument diagram", align=left]
> 
> options:: Object that signals an early exit.
> * `levels`: An exit after level `N`. 
> This object assumes the Anchor is at level 0.
> * `documents`: An exit after accumulating `N` documents. 
> 
> [source,ebnf]
> ----
> include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=recursive-with-clause-cycle]
> ----
> 
> image::n1ql-language-reference/recursive-with-clause-cycle.png["Argument diagram", align=left]
> 
> cycle:: `CYCLE <fieldnames_list> RESTRICT`. 
> List of field names in which you want to perform cycle detection.

Reviewer: Use individual 3rd level headings for each subclause in the syntax, rather than a catch-all "Arguments" section. Do the CYCLE clause first, because it comes first in the syntax. Use a table to describe the schema for the OPTIONS object.

Note also that we don't need to include any more than minimal alt text for the syntax diagrams; the EBNF text _is_ the alt text for the syntax diagram.

```suggestion
[[cycle-clause]]
=== CYCLE Clause

[source,ebnf]
----
include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=cycle-clause]
----

image::n1ql-language-reference/cycle-clause.png["Syntax diagram", align=left]

The optional CYCLE clause provides one method for avoiding infinite recursions.
It enables you to specify one or more fields whose values are likely to repeat.

expr::
(Required) An identifier representing a field.

[[options-clause]]
=== OPTIONS Clause
[source,ebnf]
----
include::partial$grammar/dql.ebnf[tag=options-clause]
----

image::n1ql-language-reference/options-clause.png["Syntax diagram", align=left]

The optional OPTIONS clause provides another method for avoiding infinite recursions.
It enables you to specify that the recursion should exit after a specified level, or after accumulating a specified number of documents.

expr::
(Required) An object with the following properties.

[options="header", cols="~a,~a,~a"]
|===
|Name|Description|Schema

|**levels** +
__optional__
|Recursion should exit after reaching this level.
This assumes the anchor is at level 0.
|Integer

|**documents** +
__optional__
|Recursion should exit after accumulating this many documents.
|Integer
|===
```

** Exceeding the implicit level limit (1000) when the level option is not in use.

[#examples_section]
== Examples

The following examples follow linear recursion.
Only one recursive reference is allowed in the FROM clause.
Self-joins or set-ops are not allowed in the recursive reference.

.Example of simple recursive referencing
====
[source,sqlpp]
----
WITH RECURSIVE cte AS (
    SELECT 1 AS r 
        UNION 
    SELECT cte.r+1 AS r 
    FROM cte 
    WHERE cte.r<4 
) 
SELECT cte.r FROM cte;
----

.Results
[source,json]
----
[
  {
    "r": 1
  },
  {
    "r": 2
  },
  {
    "r": 3
  },
  {
    "r": 4
  }
]
----
====

.Example combining recursive and non-recursive CTEs with the WITH clause
====
[source,sqlpp]
----
WITH RECURSIVE cte AS (SELECT 1 r) ,
    rcte AS ( 
        SELECT cte.r FROM cte 
            UNION 
        SELECT rcte.r+2 r FROM rcte WHERE rcte.r<7
    )
SELECT * FROM rcte;
----

.Results
[source,json]
----
[
  {
    "rcte": {
      "r": 1
    }
  },
  {
    "rcte": {
      "r": 3
    }
  },
  {
    "rcte": {
      "r": 5
    }
  },
  {
    "rcte": {
      "r": 7
    }
  }
]
----
====

> .Example finding all possible routes leaving from the TLV airport and going to 2 other airports

Reviewer 2: Add this before, as recursive queries tend to take long without appropriate indexes.
CREATE INDEX srcdestidx ON `travel-sample`.inventory.route( sourceairport, destinationairport );

Reviewer: Check whether an index like this already exists in travel sample

Reviewer 2: Hi @simon-dew ,
I can confirm that an index -> def_inventory_route_route_src_dst_day :
Definition  ```CREATE INDEX `def_inventory_route_route_src_dst_day` ON `travel-sample`.`inventory`.`route`(`sourceairport`,`destinationairport`,(distinct (array (`v`.`day`) for `v` in `schedule` end))) WITH { "defer_build":true }```

This index is used by the query but the runtime is roughly 14seconds on my machine

But the above index-> ```CREATE INDEX srcdestidx ON travel-sample.inventory.route( sourceairport, destinationairport );```

Results in a faster query( 5seconds something). I would prefer that this index be created:)

====
[source,sqlpp]
----
WITH RECURSIVE recroute AS (
    SELECT sourceairport, destinationairport, 0 as depth,
    [ sourceairport, destinationairport ] as route
    FROM `travel-sample`.inventory.route 
    WHERE sourceairport="TLV"
        UNION
    SELECT r.sourceairport, r.destinationairport, 
    ARRAY_APPEND ( recroute.route, r.destinationairport ) as route,
        recroute.depth+1 as depth
    FROM `travel-sample`.inventory.route r JOIN recroute ON 
        recroute.destinationairport = r.sourceairport
    WHERE r.sourceairport!="TLV" and recroute.depth<2 
)

> SELECT * FROM recroute LIMIT 10;

Reviewer 2: LIMIT BY 10 defeats the purpose of the example as, all results would indicate traversal of depth 0 or only the root of the graph

After trying again I can confirm that it takes atleast 2000docs to see results from an iteration of depth = 2.

Which is why I would show simpler examples shown in the dev google doc.
But add the travel-sample example at the end just for reference.
Also those example indicate usage of the OPTIONS and CYCLE subclause.

you can see here how snowflake have done a similar job with a smaller example allowing user to first setup the data using insert and later a query to show usage.
https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/queries-cte#recursive-ctes-and-hierarchical-data

Reviewer: I agree with this comment. Note that if you don't want to show the entire result set, to save space in the document, you can cut down the example using an ellipsis `...`, like you did in the LATERAL examples.
